### Kinesiology: 
Study of movement as it relates to anatomy and physiology.

### Evidence-based practice:
A practice that relies on evidence for guidance and decision-making and includes developing individual expertise, staying current on the best sources of external evidence (e.g., peer-reviewed research), and prioritizing client values and expectations.

### Optimum Performance Training (OPT)
- Phase-1- Stabilization Endurance
- Phase-2- Strength Endurance
- Phase-3- Muscular Development
- Phase-4- Maximal Strenght
- Phase-5- Power


### Musculoskeletal system:
The combined, interworking system of all muscles and bones in the body.


### Deconditioned:
A state of lost physical fitness, which may include muscle imbalances, decreased flexibility, and a lack of core and joint stability.

### Overweight: 
A body weight greater than what is considered within normal standards; a body mass index of 25.0 to 29.9.

### Muscle imbalance:
When muscles on each side of a joint have altered length-tension relationships.


### Joint stability
The support provided by tissues surrounding a joint to maintain and provide control during movement.

### An integrated approach to exercise represents the inclusion of the following forms of training:
- Flexibility and mobility
- Core strength and stability
- Cardiorespiratory (cardio)
- Balance
- Plyometrics
- Speed, agility, and quickness
- Resistance

### What does the term evidence-based practice refer to?
- The conscientious use of current research in making decisions about client care

### Socioeconomic status: 
- The social standing of a person or group that includes education, income, and occupation.

### Morbidity: 
- The state of having a disease.

### Mortality:
- A state or a risk of death or dying.

### Homeostasis
- The process by which the human body strives to maintain a relatively stable equilibrium.

### Acute Versus Chronic Disease
An acute medical event or disease is any medical condition that occurs suddenly and can be treated and healed in a short period of time. For example, an isolated bout of bronchitis is an acute medical condition that is easily treated with antibiotics and rest, and typically resolves in a week or so. However, if left untreated, the condition could progress to more serious chronic problems.

A chronic disease is a medical condition that persists for a long duration or cannot be cured altogether, typically lasting for 3 months or more. Chronic diseases generally cannot be prevented by vaccines or cured by medications, nor do they just disappear over time. For example, individuals with a long history of smoking are prone to acute bouts of bronchitis, which can and often do progress toward chronic bronchitis.

It is important for fitness professionals to keep in mind that a wide range of chronic diseases can be avoided by two simple things: eating a healthy diet and taking part in regular exercise to stay physically fit. Someone who is primarily sedentary, is deconditioned, and eats a diet mainly consisting of junk food will be far more likely to develop a chronic disease than someone who follows a healthy diet and stays regularly active (CDC, 2020a, 2020b).

### BMI: 
- Metric formula: BMI = weight (kg) ÷ [height (m)]2
- Imperial formula: BMI = 703 × weight (lb) ÷ [height (in.)]2


### BMI Classification
BMI

< 18.5 - Underweight
18.5–24.9 - Healthy weight
25.0–29.9 - Overweight
30.0–34.9 - Obese
35.0–39.9 - Obesity II
≥ 40.0 - Obesity III

### HEART DISEASE
- Stroke: A sudden lack of blood supply to the brain, caused by either a blockage in an artery or ruptured blood vessel.

- 





