### Kinesiology: 
Study of movement as it relates to anatomy and physiology.

### Evidence-based practice:
A practice that relies on evidence for guidance and decision-making and includes developing individual expertise, staying current on the best sources of external evidence (e.g., peer-reviewed research), and prioritizing client values and expectations.

### Optimum Performance Training (OPT)
- Phase-1- Stabilization Endurance
- Phase-2- Strength Endurance
- Phase-3- Muscular Development
- Phase-4- Maximal Strenght
- Phase-5- Power


### Musculoskeletal system:
The combined, interworking system of all muscles and bones in the body.


### Deconditioned:
A state of lost physical fitness, which may include muscle imbalances, decreased flexibility, and a lack of core and joint stability.

### Overweight: 
A body weight greater than what is considered within normal standards; a body mass index of 25.0 to 29.9.

### Muscle imbalance:
When muscles on each side of a joint have altered length-tension relationships.


### Joint stability
The support provided by tissues surrounding a joint to maintain and provide control during movement.

### An integrated approach to exercise represents the inclusion of the following forms of training:
- Flexibility and mobility
- Core strength and stability
- Cardiorespiratory (cardio)
- Balance
- Plyometrics
- Speed, agility, and quickness
- Resistance

### What does the term evidence-based practice refer to?
- The conscientious use of current research in making decisions about client care

### Socioeconomic status: 
- The social standing of a person or group that includes education, income, and occupation.

### Morbidity: 
- The state of having a disease.

### Mortality:
- A state or a risk of death or dying.

### Homeostasis
- The process by which the human body strives to maintain a relatively stable equilibrium.

### Acute Versus Chronic Disease
An acute medical event or disease is any medical condition that occurs suddenly and can be treated and healed in a short period of time. For example, an isolated bout of bronchitis is an acute medical condition that is easily treated with antibiotics and rest, and typically resolves in a week or so. However, if left untreated, the condition could progress to more serious chronic problems.

A chronic disease is a medical condition that persists for a long duration or cannot be cured altogether, typically lasting for 3 months or more. Chronic diseases generally cannot be prevented by vaccines or cured by medications, nor do they just disappear over time. For example, individuals with a long history of smoking are prone to acute bouts of bronchitis, which can and often do progress toward chronic bronchitis.

It is important for fitness professionals to keep in mind that a wide range of chronic diseases can be avoided by two simple things: eating a healthy diet and taking part in regular exercise to stay physically fit. Someone who is primarily sedentary, is deconditioned, and eats a diet mainly consisting of junk food will be far more likely to develop a chronic disease than someone who follows a healthy diet and stays regularly active (CDC, 2020a, 2020b).

### BMI: 
- Metric formula: BMI = weight (kg) ÷ [height (m)]2
- Imperial formula: BMI = 703 × weight (lb) ÷ [height (in.)]2


### BMI Classification
BMI

< 18.5 - Underweight
18.5–24.9 - Healthy weight
25.0–29.9 - Overweight
30.0–34.9 - Obese
35.0–39.9 - Obesity II
≥ 40.0 - Obesity III

### HEART DISEASE
- Stroke: A sudden lack of blood supply to the brain, caused by either a blockage in an artery or ruptured blood vessel.

- Heart attack: The action that occurs when an artery supplying the heart with blood and oxygen becomes blocked; medically known as a myocardial infarction.

- Heart failure: A condition in which the heart can’t pump enough blood to meet the body’s needs.

- Heart valve problem: A condition that occurs when one or more heart valves do not function properly, causing shortness of breath and reduced oxygen supply to the body.

- Arrhythmia: A problem with the rate or rhythm of a person’s heartbeat. The heart beats too quickly, too slowly, or with an irregular pattern.

- Ischemic heart disease: A category of heart-related problems caused by the narrowing of coronary arteries, which supply blood and oxygen to the heart muscle.

- Atherosclerosis: The processes by which plaque is formed in arteries leading to reduced blood flow.

### Exercise Versus Physical Activity
- Exercise is a structured and planned form of human movement to elicit a physical adaptation, such as weight loss or improved endurance or strength. Examples of exercise include weight lifting, cycling, running, or swimming. Exercise programs can occur in a gym setting or outside and can also be performed alone or in a group setting.

- Physical activity refers to movement that expends energy, such as walking, yardwork, recreational sports, or playtime. Physical activity can be categorized as continuous or intermittent and can be performed across a wide range of intensity levels, from walking a dog to vigorously shoveling snow after a storm. Physical activity is not typically structured or planned, rather, it represents natural movement throughout a person’s day.

# HYPERTENSION: 
Hypertension, specifically, is one of the primary risk factors for heart disease and stroke (World Health Organization, 2019). Hypertension is categorized by a blood pressure greater than 120/80 (systolic/diastolic) millimeters of mercury (mm Hg) (Hernandez-Vila, 2015). Fitness professionals need to promote awareness of hypertension and encourage clients to modify risk factors, such as poor diet, lack of physical activity, and tobacco use.

- Systolic blood pressure (SBP) is the pressure in arteries and other blood vessels when the heart is beating or contracting. It is the first (top) number recorded.

- Diastolic blood pressure (DBP) is the pressure in arteries and other blood vessels when the heart is at rest or between beats; it is the second (bottom) number recorded.

### Blood pressure is classified as follows:

- Normal (healthy): Less than 120/80 mm Hg
- Elevated: Systolic between 120 and 129 and diastolic less than 80 mm Hg
- Stage 1 hypertension: Systolic between 130 and 139 or diastolic between 80 and 89 mm Hg
- Stage 2 hypertension: Systolic 140 or higher or diastolic 90 mm Hg or higher
- Hypertensive crisis: Systolic greater than 180 and/or diastolic greater than 120 mm Hg (Whelton et al., 2018)

### CHOLESTEROL: 
Elevated total cholesterol (medically referred to as dyslipidemia) is a major cause of disease burden in both the developed and developing world. Chronically elevated cholesterol levels increase the risks of heart disease and stroke (CDC, 2020c; Park et al., 2018). Cholesterol is a waxy substance found in blood that is made up of a combination of protein and fatty acids, known as a lipoprotein. When a healthy, balanced diet is consumed, the human body produces all of its own necessary cholesterol. The human body needs cholesterol to build healthy cells, carry products in the blood, and support the nervous system.

Chronically high cholesterol can develop fatty deposits in blood vessels and can increase a person’s risk for heart disease (Nelson, 2013). Although it serves a vital bodily function, cholesterol should be frequently monitored to promote health and prevent disease, because it is a major component of the plaque that leads to atherosclerosis.

### “Good” and “Bad” Cholesterol
There are two main types of cholesterol in the body: low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and high-density lipoprotein (HDL). LDL cholesterol, sometimes referred to as “bad cholesterol,” tends to increase the risk of cardiovascular disease (Nelson, 2013). LDLs, specifically, are the form of cholesterol that makes up the plaque that clogs arteries. Ideally, LDL levels should be less than 100 milligrams per deciliter (mg/dL) (O’Keefe et al., 2004).

HDL cholesterol, on the other hand, is sometimes referred to as “good cholesterol.” It does not have the tendency to clog arteries like LDL cholesterol does and, in fact, actually helps remove some LDL cholesterol from the body. To help reduce the risk of heart disease, in conjunction with lowering LDL levels below 100 mg/dL, HDL levels should typically be kept around 60 mg/dL (Grundy et al., 2018; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2001).


### DIABETES: 
- Diabetes: Chronic metabolic disorder, caused by insulin deficiency, which impairs carbohydrate usage and enhances usage of fat and protein.

- Glucose: The simplest form of carbohydrate used by the body for energy.

- Insulin resistance: The inability of the cells to respond to insulin; occurs in type 2 diabetes.

### CANCER: 
A group of diseases involving abnormal cell growth with the potential to invade or spread to other parts of the body.

### Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD): 
A general term used to describe progressive lung diseases, including emphysema, chronic bronchitis, and refractory (nonreversible) asthma.


### STRESS:
STRESS
The world we live in is becoming more and more complex, fueled by rapid change and the need to constantly respond and adapt to it. In the face of 24-hour news cycles, social media, and increased demands for productivity, stress is on the rise. According to the Global Organization for Stress, most of the world is affected by stress and stress-related complications (deVries & Wilkerson, 2003). Stress levels in the workplace are rising, with 6 in 10 workers in all major global economies reporting that their workplace-related stress is increasing (Birhanu et al., 2018). And that workplace stress is taking its toll, with stress-related illnesses rising in turn among all segments of the population (Fink, 2016). Constant unmanaged stress and anxiety is harmful to both the body and mind and may elevate the risk for chronic disease (Yaribeygi et al., 2017).

However, regular physical activity and exercise have been shown to help control and manage stress and anxiety (Rebar et al., 2015). Any form of physical activity or exercise can act as a powerful stress release and is perhaps the “best medicine” to help relieve stress. One way regular exercise helps reduce stress is by the brain releasing endorphins that are associated with pain reduction and feelings of increased well-being and happiness. Additionally, the ability of exercise to help lower and control heart rate and blood pressure makes it an important countermeasure to stress and anxiety. For those reasons, the role of physical activity and exercise in helping to relieve and control stress is extensive and convincing

### Evidence of Muscular Dysfunction and Increased Injury:
Skeletal muscle development and maintenance is vital to ensure optimal health and well-being across the life span of all individuals. Skeletal muscle tissue accounts for a significant amount of overall body mass and supports freedom of movement within the environment. In addition to the increased risk and occurrence of chronic diseases, too much sitting and physical inactivity can also cause dysfunction in our body’s muscular and skeletal systems, which can lead to an increased risk of injury and instances of low-back, shoulder, and neck pain (Law & Sluka, 2017; Owen et al., 2010; Thorp et al., 2011).

- FOOT AND ANKLE DYSFUNCTION: Foot and ankle injuries can severely limit and impact normal activities of daily living (Chinn & Hertel, 2010). Two of the most common issues at the foot and ankle complex include ankle sprains and plantar fasciitis. An ankle sprain occurs when a person’s ankle is rolled, twisted, or turned, which results in the stretching or tearing of the ligaments that hold the bones of the ankle together and connect it to the foot and the lower leg. Plantar fasciitis involves inflammation of the tissue on the bottom of the foot that connects the heel bone to the toes (i.e., the plantar fascia) and often results in chronic heel pain.

The feet and ankles support the entire body; as a result, impairments to the foot and ankle complex may cause dysfunction to other regions of the body such as the knees, hips, or lower back (Menz et al., 2013; Riskowski et al., 2013). Additionally, if someone has previously injured their ankle, there is a far greater risk of injuring it again if work has not been done to properly condition it back to a strong and stable place (Fulton et al., 2014). This makes it highly important for fitness professionals to monitor the posture of their clients’ feet and ankles during exercise so they can better develop proper movement patterns.

- KNEE DYSFUNCTION: Knee pain is a common complaint that can affect anyone regardless of age or level of physical activity. Possible causes of knee pain include arthritis, acute (sudden onset) injuries, and overuse (repetitive) injuries. Arguably, three of the most common knee injuries include patellar tendonitis, anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) tears, and medial collateral ligament (MCL) tears. Some forms of chronic knee pain are also associated with being overweight or obese and a lack of regular physical activity (Frilander et al., 2016).

It is important for fitness professionals to have a basic understanding of proper knee alignment and posture, as well as ways to monitor exercise technique to minimize the risk of injury. Many common types of knee injuries and disorders can be prevented with proper exercise technique, supportive footwear, and modifications to exercise and physical activity as necessary. Regular flexibility and strength training plans with the inclusion of a comprehensive warm-up component can help significantly reduce the incidence of knee injuries (Park et al., 2018).

- LUMBO-PELVIC-HIP COMPLEX DYSFUNCTION: The lumbo-pelvic-hip complex (LPHC) is made up of the lumbar spine (low-back area), pelvis, abdomen, and hip musculoskeletal structures and is commonly referred to as “the core.” The LPHC is an important anatomical structure because it connects the upper and lower halves of a person’s body. Increasing strength and stability of the LPHC is important for improvements in health, sports performance, and prevention of injuries because an unstable core limits the ability of the limbs to properly produce force and predisposes an individual to back or hip pain (De Blaiser et al., 2018; Granacher et al., 2013; Hewett et al., 2005; Richardson et al., 2002). In fact, nearly 80% of adults experience some form of low-back pain at least once during their lifetime (Nam, 2011). As such, fitness professionals must have working knowledge of the muscles that make up the core and design fitness programs that increase core stability and strength.

- SHOULDER DYSFUNCTION: Shoulder pain is a common occurrence, especially as the body ages. Simple, routine movements, such as taking out the trash, getting dressed, or reaching for something overhead, can often cause discomfort when the shoulder joints are in a deconditioned state. Shoulder pain and injuries are also quite common in sports and weight training, especially during overhead lifting. Shoulder problems may be due to the instability of the shoulder joint or impingement of the soft tissue or bony structures of the shoulder, known as shoulder impingement syndrome (Mitchell et al., 2005).

Because so many functional movements involve the shoulders, fitness professionals must have a working knowledge of their muscles and structures. A regular routine of upper-body flexibility and properly implemented strength training can help reduce the risk of shoulder injuries. In addition, fitness professionals should ensure clients perform high-intensity exercises correctly and only engage in training programs that are suitable for their individual abilities, goals, and objectives; for example, aggressive swinging pull-ups and hammer swing exercises can be dangerous for individuals without advanced levels of shoulder fitness already in place (Summitt et al., 2016).

Chapter 1
The Modern State of Health and Fitness
Lesson 4
Evidence of Muscular Dysfunction and Increased Injury
Page 3
SHOULDER DYSFUNCTION
Shoulder pain is a common occurrence, especially as the body ages. Simple, routine movements, such as taking out the trash, getting dressed, or reaching for something overhead, can often cause discomfort when the shoulder joints are in a deconditioned state. Shoulder pain and injuries are also quite common in sports and weight training, especially during overhead lifting. Shoulder problems may be due to the instability of the shoulder joint or impingement of the soft tissue or bony structures of the shoulder, known as shoulder impingement syndrome (Mitchell et al., 2005).

Because so many functional movements involve the shoulders, fitness professionals must have a working knowledge of their muscles and structures. A regular routine of upper-body flexibility and properly implemented strength training can help reduce the risk of shoulder injuries. In addition, fitness professionals should ensure clients perform high-intensity exercises correctly and only engage in training programs that are suitable for their individual abilities, goals, and objectives; for example, aggressive swinging pull-ups and hammer swing exercises can be dangerous for individuals without advanced levels of shoulder fitness already in place (Summitt et al., 2016).

- HEAD AND NECK DYSFUNCTION: Headaches and neck pain are common ailments, and poor posture of the head and neck are often the cause. Much of the time, poor head and neck posture is due to extended periods looking at computer screens or mobile phones. For example, text neck is a growing phenomenon that researchers are investigating to identify whether habitual use of cell phones influences neck pain (Gustafsson et al., 2017; Xie et al., 2016). Placing the head in a constant state of flexion (looking downward) affects many of the muscles of the neck area and may cause neck soreness.

Forward head posture is another common cause of head and neck pain. Jutting the head forward increases the workload for many of the muscles attached to the cervical spine (upper spine area), which has the job of stabilizing the head. Over time, forward head posture can lead to dysfunction of the neck area as the body tries to adapt and find efficient ways to raise the head for straight-ahead vision. Forward head posture can be seen in office workers and other individuals who routinely work in front of a computer and naturally tend to migrate the head toward the screen when trying to focus (Nejati et al., 2015; Szeto et al., 2002).

Exercise has been shown to be beneficial for individuals exhibiting forward head posture, especially for the reduction of lingering neck discomfort (Sheikhhoseini et al., 2018). Many people who seek the services of a fitness professional are habitual mobile phone users or office workers who spend most of their day working on a computer. Consequently, fitness professionals should monitor the position of their clients’ head and neck during exercise to minimize the risk of injury and help train proper posture and movement patterns.

